Let us talk about Time and Space Complexity.
This is a very important topic, and sometimes it is difficult for the students to understand though it
is not that difficult, it's not complex.
Though the word complexity is used, it is very simple.
Let me explain you,
What does it mean by Time Complexity?
Then, afterwards I'll tell you about Space Complexity also.
So, first let us start with Time Complexity. See, in daily life,
when we do any work, any task, we want to know how much time it takes for that, performing that particular
task. Let us suppose, it is a one hour task, or a one day task.
So that amount of time required, depending on the work that we have to do.
So, usually in daily life, we measure the time based on the work that we have to do.
So, now we're using machines to do our work, that is computers to do our work.
So, we want to know how much time the machine takes for doing the same task.
Like, if a person is making a bread in 15 minutes, 20 minutes then, if you're using machine for making
that bread, How much time the machine takes?
We are interested in that. What if ,machine is taking 45 hours, then it's better to do it manually.
So, how much time a machine takes is very important for us.
So, we use computers for problem solving,
What type of problem solving? The work that we used to do using pen and paper.
That same work,
We want our computers to do that.
So, computers are used for performing computation task. So, computation also needs time.
So, you want to measure, how much time a machine will take.
So, actually that depends on the process, or the procedure for completing that task.
So, the Time Complexity basically depends on the procedure that you are adopting. So, for giving you the
idea, I have taken various examples. Using these examples,
I'll explain you, what procedure may take what amount of time.
So, let us start with array. See, this is an array of some size, and some elements are there.
So how many elements are there?
See, this is the example already I have taken,
and you can count, there are total 10 elements but will it be always 10 elements? or depends on the
problem?
So, depending on the problem.
So, how many elements may be there in
the list of elements in an array? We say n elements. We don't know how many elements will be there, maybe
10, or 10 000, or 10 000 000,
We don't know.
So we say n. n means, some number of elements, that number of elements may start from 1, up-to infinity.
So, we don't define infinity, so, up-to maximum number, or whatever that number you can imagine, you take
that one. So, n means not just 5 or 10 does, this is the first important thing, mostly students get confused
here.
So, n means some number of elements.
So, let us say there are n elements in this list.
Now, What do you want to do with these elements?
I want to add all of them.
So, you have to go through all of them, one by one you have to take the element and go on adding it.
So, how much time it takes depends on the number of elements.
So, what is the time taken? n, we say n. Then next thing, what do you want to do?
I want to search for a particular number, whether element 12 is there or not, search for it.
Yes it is there.
I want to search for element 21,
Is it there or not? Check for all.
No, 21 is not there.
So, utmost how much time is it taking?
It depends on the number of elements that you have to compare.
So, how many elements are there? n elements are there.
So, what is the time taken?
n. So the time is n. So, it means in a list, if you have some n elements and you are going through all
of them just once then the time is n.
So this n, we represent it as a degree. So, we can say Order(n). We usually use the term
order; degree or order are same thing,
So, we use the term Order(n). There are other terms like, bigo, omega, theta, that I will explain
you at the end of the course, because till then, you will be having the good understanding of time complexities
then I can explain you what is bigo, omega, and theta. So, through out the course I'll be using term
Order( ).
So, when we know what are asymptotic notations, like bigo, omega,theta, then you will understand
how to use them. So, let's say Order( ), then next thing.
Next very important thing, if you want to access all the elements, then what is the code that you have
to write? for(i=0;i<n;i++)
for(i=0;i<n;i++), then whatever you want to do here, means you want to add all of them, or
search something, or count number of elements, or finding maximum element, whatever you want to do, that logic
comes here.
So, that procedure comes here.
So, whatever the procedure may be then, this for loop is taking us through all those elements n. So, how
many elements? n elements.
So, what is the time? Order(n). Now listen, the very important thing. For finding the time complexity either
you can measure the time based on the work that you are doing, means according to your procedure, if you're clear
with your procedure, you can know the time, or else from the code, program code also you can find the
time complexity. If there is a for loop, going through 0 to last element, then it's n, it's taking Order(n)
time, whatever it is there inside will repeat for n times. So, we analyse based on the procedure also,
based on the code also. And the most confusing thing is, when the code is given we get confused
how to analyze this one. So, actually what the code is doing,
You do that work, and based on the work you analyse it, it's very simple. It's very simple. If you don't
want to understand what the code is doing, then it's a difficult task. So, if a for loop is used means there is
a chance that time is Order(n). Now, let us move to the next situation.
See, in this list, see suppose, being on the 1st element,
I am comparing or processing all other elements once. Then, being on the second element,
Again I am processing all other elements,
maybe I'm comparing for sorting purposes, whatever the purpose may be,
this 5, I am comparing or processing with the rest of the elements, like that for each element,
I'll be checking with all the rest of the elements.
So, for 1 value, it will check for all, means n elements.
Then, for next value also,
If it is checking for all, processing for all, then n. n elements. So, n elements are being processed, but
How many times? For each element n elements are processed. So, this will be n^2.
This is n*n, that is n^2. So, we can say Order(n^2).
So, this is another case. Now, in this same case,
I'll show you one more thing, for processing like this how the code should look like? The code should
have a nested for loop.
Again, I should have for loop that is, for(j=0;j<n;j++), and inside this
I'll be writing that processing, whatever the work I want to do.
These will be the statements.
So, when you have two nested for loops, it's n^2, simple. You don't have to check line by line every
statement and all, just from the code you got the rough idea, you can say it's n^2. But sometimes,
for analyzing the code we check every line.
So, the idea is, we should not miss any line,
We should check
check it thoroughly.
That's why we write the time complexity, but overall, the time complexity is written in terms of the degree
of a polynomial. So, it is Order(n^2). Nested for loop means n^2.
So, let us follow it like a formula.
Third situation, for the same array.
Suppose, being on first element, I'm processing the rest of the elements.
So, n-1 elements I'm processing, then being on the second element, I'm processing the rest of
the elements, I'm not processing upon this one, right?
So n-2. Then, being on third element, I'm processing rest of them.
It depends what you are doing.
Right?
So, imagine something you are doing. So, you're processing rest of the elements. So, this is n-3.
Like that,
It will be going on reducing, then finally it will be 4 elements, 3 elements, 2 elements, then 1.
What is this?
(n*(n-1))/2, sum of first natural numbers,
So, it is not n, it is n-1.
So this will be (n^2 - n)/2.
So, what is the degree of this polynomial?
This is n^2.
So, it is Order(n^2). So, that's what. The time complexity that we are writing,
We are writing the degree of a polynomial.
See, this time I have done detailed analysis and I got a polynomial, and for that I got a function, this is
like a function, and the degree of the function is n^2, so time is n^2.
If same thing, I write it in the form of a for loop, then this j will not be starting from 0, but
j will be starting from i+1. See, now again two nested for loops.
So utmost, this will take n^2 time.
Yes. Then next, I'll show you one more situation.
Fourth one.
Let us look at this.
I'll remove this one. Now in this array,
Suppose, first of all we are processing the middle element, suppose 4 is the middle element, right? There
are 10 elements.
So 5th element is the middle element.
Then next, either on the left side or on the right side
again we go in the middle, suppose this is the middle element on this side. Then again, middle
element on this side.
So, in this way we are not processing the entire list.
We are processing half of the list,
Then again it's half,
So, that process is always dividing the list by two.
So, when something is successively divided until it reaches one, that is represented as log,
And we are divided by 2, 1/2.
So, log of n elements, "log n". So, the time complexity is log n, if we are not processing all elements.
Then, if I write for that one, then the code will look like this, for(i=n;i>1;i=i/2)
for(i=n;i>1;i=i/2)
Now, just by looking at for loop,
Don't tell
blindly Order(n), because just now, previously we saw Order(n)
Read it,
How the for loop is behaving.
That's why, we check it thoroughly. When we are reading the code,
We totally check it
line by line. So that, we should not go wrong.
But overall we need answer, log n.
If the value of counter i is getting divided by 2 every time, then it is log n, divided by 2, log n
base 2. And how long is it happening?
Until it reaches 1.
The same thing can even be written by using while loop, See, i=n;
And, while(i>1) and some processing; i=i/2;
Same thing. Instead of for loop,
You can use while loop also. Usually, when this is not on increment, one by one every time, for loop is
not on increment by one every time,
We prefer using while loop. But in C, C++, Java programming, when for loops are there, people use for loop for
this purpose also. For loop is used for counters which are on increment by 1.
So anyway, when this is written, you have to read it thoroughly and find out how much time it is taking.
So, we have seen 4 different behaviors of procedures that are performed on array, and also I have shown
you the code, and also shown you, from the code how we can analyze from the work.
So, if you are analyzing from the work, the process, that's more better.
Now, let us proceed ahead.
See, this is the linked list. We'll be studying about this linked list data structure later on, this will be
same as array; like, this is list, and this also a list.
So, what all we studied there,
same things apply here.
Then, next is matrix. Matrix is having how many elements? The dimensions are 4x4.
So, total how many elements? If dimensions is nxn, then total, n^2 elements. So, when you're
processing upon a matrix, then it will require n^2 amount of time,
If you're processing all the elements. If you say, No I'm just processing a row, then a row is having n
elements, Order(n), no I'm processing just a column,
So, again it's n, Order(n). If you're processing all elements, then it is n^2. Now, I'll show the
code for that.
I'll remove this. So, for processing a matrix of elements, we need 2 nested for loops,for(i=0;i<n;i++), and inside
this, for(j=0;j<n;j++), whatever you want to do with those elements you
can do that.
So, this is n^2. Now, for 1 element, if you're processing more upon that element, and that requires,
suppose, a loop or, suppose you are calling a function which is having a loop, then the time will be more,
for, for, for, 3 for loops inside, then it will be n^3, right?
If you are processing only one unit of time;
Just one statement or two statements are there, simple statements, no loops, then it is n^2 only. Then, coming
to this structure.
This looks like array of linked lists, like total how many elements are there?
So, here let us say n elements are there, these elements. So, you can see that, these are of different sizes,
and here, array of size n.
So total how much processing is required?
We have to process all these n elements, as well as using this array, so we can say m+n processing
is required.
If you say, no I don't want to consider this, I want to consider only the number of elements. Okay,
consider only n number of elements, Order(n).
What does it mean by considering, not considering?
I'll give you an idea. Just listen as an example. Suppose, you are giving a party to your friends, some
4,5 friends you have called them on a hotel for a party. Then, what is the cost?
The cost of the food that you're taking there.
Then, the bill at the hotel, + travelling amount, and if any extra things that you are spending on,
tips you are giving.
Do you consider that amount also and include it as the cost for the party?
It depends on you. Now, the same way, whether you want to analyze or not, it depends on you.
So, you should be in a situation to understand, whether you need it or not.
Right?
Mostly, what students believe that, they are doing it because it is given as a task, as a challenge.
So, somebody else's job they are doing.
So, they get worried that, I should consider or not; Why I should leave it?
So, that is your choice.
You be in that situation and solve it.
So, that's all.
If you say, I don't want to consider this, means you are processing it, but you don't want to consider
the time taken for that one. So, only Order(n), that's it.
So, this structure is over.
Now, last one.
This one. This is a binary tree.
So, if you have a binary tree structure, total elements are 7, 7 elements
are there.
Then, how much processing is done?
Suppose, you are processing, searching or something, and you are processing upon the elements, only along
the path, like this one, then this one, or this one, or this one, then this one, or this one.
Suppose, you're processing just along a path, then what is the height?
It depends on the height.
So, how many elements you are processing?
See, there are some elements, divided by 2, then divided by 2,
until it reaches 1 element. So total seven elements are there. As from the bottom, if you see the number
of elements are divided by 2, and divided by 2.
So, it looks like log n. Yes, log n base 2.
So, we'll be studying about this one.
So, if you're spending time upon a tree, along the height of a tree, then it is log n.
Next situation, if you say, no I want to process all the elements, then how many elements are there?
n element.
So, it is Order(n), then whatever the program code that you write for processing this one, that
code also will be Order(n)
Order(n) only, if you analyze that one.
So, this is the general idea I have given you about time complexity. So, the time complexity is solely
and solely dependent on the work that you are doing. Now, a little bit on space complexity.
We want to know how much space is consumed in main memory during the execution of a program.
So, array, n elements are there, so it's Order(n). This is, n elements are there, Order(n). Space is n,
means, n integers, or n floats, or n doubles, whatever it is; n elements we say. We are not concerned
about the number of bytes, right? We are not concerned about that. We are not calculating
that, we want to know, the space is dependent on what? n. If the value of n is more, the space will
be more, that's what the idea is. Then, here also it's n, but along with the elements you need space for links also.
So, let's say 2n, again the degree is what? Order(n). Then, coming to this, this space is
n^2, and this space is m+n, and the space here is, n nodes are there, so it's Order(n).
So, the next video I'll take few program codes and show you.
So, without looking at the processing, just from the program code, how to find out the time complexity,
I will show you. So, that's all in this video.